...African agricultural research capabilities
was National Academy of Sciences.
I spent about six weeks on that trip. And
then... In 1974.
Prior to that actually. That's when that was
published.
And then I
spent some time in Pakistan for the World Bank on
this one. Which is the same sort of deal in
principle as that. I
see. Livestock production and marketing in
Pakistan.
I spent a month over there with two other fellows
working on that project.
West Pakistan.
And you wrote Evaluation of Livestock Health
Practices in Pakistan, I see. So it's a combined
effort here. That's right. I visited all their
research labs, trying to help them with these
projects. And you took your knowledge to them. Did
they have some of the same problems? Yes, they had
problems with African horse sickness. I also
spent, while I was in the Army actually, Before I
left the Army, I spent a good many months in many
countries of Africa and Asia on African horse
sickness because it was a national threat to this
country, you see. And the Army sent me over there
from the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology.
Well in Africa and in Turkey and Iran and
Afghanistan and Pakistan and India, all those
places on African horse sickness and wrote
numerous papers about it that are listed there.
Now when you went to some of these governments, all
of these governments that you went to in the 1960s
were so-called West-oriented governments. Did
the State Department give you any, did they tell
you or did any officials from the United States
government tell you about what the Communists or
what the Soviets were attempting to do? No,
I had security clearances, of course, during that
time. Sure, because of your dealings with the
Army, your career with the Army.
The only time I
had to be careful from
a Russian point of view was in taking photographs
in Iran and Turkey,
at which time
there was some Russian participation in highway
development in those countries and some things of
that sort. But I never went to any
communist-dominated countries at that time.
Were you ever briefed by the CIA when you came back
from these trips? Yes. Yeah, that was done.
They basically wanted to know about the food
production? interior of the nation? Yeah, that's
right. They were concerned about- Just general
intelligence? General intelligence.
But I'd rather really not talk about that aspect of
it much because I did have some relations with the
CIA at that time. Now, I was also wondering about
something that you said. And that is that drug
manufacturing companies supplied money for
this. Yes, they did for- Which companies? Well,
I'd have to look it up to be sure now. But what they
did was simply that they had some drugs which they
wanted to evaluate for their therapeutic effect
against these diseases we were working on. And
this we did and reported back to them and were
compensated for the work. And so basically, did
they give you about a third of the funding, or less?
No, it wasn't that way. It was a relatively minor
amount, a few thousand dollars a year. But during
our 12-year program, we had received between, I'd
say, between $5 and $6 million from Rockefeller in
aid for the program. And that, from commercial
sources, was only a few thousand. Just nothing,
yeah. Okay. Well, I'd like to talk now about the
relationship that you had with the state of Texas.
I'm trying
to think of the name of the fellow that was in charge
at the time. He was a veterinarian and the name of
the board.
Well, at any rate, the veterinary group employed
by the state of Texas, state veterinarians,
do have a keen interest in health of livestock in
Texas. So they're much concerned about any group
which is contributing toward improving health of
Texas cattle and increasing opportunities for
Texas livestock to be exported. They're also very
much concerned about foreign diseases which are a
threat to Texas livestock.
And it's the Texas Animal Health Commission that I
was trying to think about here. They were greatly
concerned and involved us considerably when
Benzoylan equine encephalomyelitis came into
southern Texas in 1971 and 72. And because I'd had
experience with that disease in terms of
manufacturing vaccine at Walter Reed and
some other exposure prior to that, I became very
much involved in that threat to the United States
when the disease moved from Mexico into Texas. And
so I met several times at that time with a group of
state veterinarians, the Animal Health
Commission, and worked closely with them for
several months on this equine encephalomyelitis
problem that we had here. Well, what happened?
Well, there was Quite a few thousand Texas horses
lost because of that disease in 71 and 72. But
fortunately, the vaccine we had developed in the
late 40s and 50s at Walter Reed was subsequently
produced by some manufacturing biologic houses
in the United States, which made it available for
for the vaccination of Texas horses and for those
in many states across the southern half of the
United States. So those vaccines that had been
developed years before were effective in
stopping the outbreak in the United States and
kept it from sweeping the country. So that work we
had done earlier was what really saved the horse
industry in this country. Now let's switch to the
relations that you had with the administration at
A&M. Can you sort of trace that from when you came
here at Dean Price? Yes. Dean Price was interested
in the potential of a program in tropical
veterinary medicine, and so he worked well with us
in helping get things planned and organized. And
then he and I met with President Rutter, who was
also sold upon the potential of improved disease
control, which would not only have worldwide
benefits in terms of food supply, but also
increase the market for Texas agriculture and
Texas livestock. And so we were then, with
Rutter's blessings, free to go out and seek funds
and develop the program, which we did. We worked
along very well that way for a 10-year, 11-year
period.
After that, there were changes in the
administration
so that the Tagus Agricultural Experiment
Station became involved.
Why did they become involved? I don't really know
why they became involved, but they did. And
when Dr. Trevino took over and when I left in 76,
he was not permitted to go out and seek funds on his
own, which were available. That's at the time when
there was some ten million dollars available from
Nigeria and substantial funds available from
Latin America to
foster the program and to improve opportunities
for export of Texas cattle as well as improve the
health of animals in the regions that wanted to
provide support.
And the administration would not permit
acceptance of the programs or the acceptance of
the funds. Why not? I don't know. I don't really
know except that there was apparently some
personal conflicts between Trujillo and some
higher level administration people.
In the president's office? No, it was the
experiment station. But you weren't directly
under the Experiment Station. No. I mean the
Institute wasn't under the Experiment Station.
No, it was under the College of Veterinary
Medicine. But it was because of that barrier there
that projects were not moved up to the
International Programs Office where they would
have okayed them and where we could have gotten on
with the, the Institute could have gotten on with
the programs.
But because of that impossible hurdle. The
institute practically died on the vine out there,
and that's been the trouble. Well, what happened
to Shelton? I mean, why didn't the dean? Because
the experiment station, to the best of my
knowledge, was providing some funds for the vet
school that might have been cut off if he hadn't
played ball with them.
This is pretty ticklish. I don't really like to
talk about it. And so now what's the status of the
institute? Well, it's getting minimal support
through the vet school.
Very, very little in the way of outside funds.
Who's getting the outside funds then? There isn't
any for this work coming from outside, to my
knowledge. Even though, in other words, some
other university, college of medicine might be
getting it. Hell yes. There's outside funds going
to Illinois, to Florida, and Washington State
that I know about. In sizable quantity. And the
U.S. Department of Agriculture is now spending a
million and a half dollars a year in Washington
State that was originally intended to come here,
but not accepted. No kidding. It's a damn tragedy.
It really is. And part of our staff, Dr. Cutler and
two other people that were on the staff here are now
running the program in Washington State that they
would like to be carrying on here and getting
excellent USDA support.
So it's unfortunate. I just don't understand why.
I know I might be belaboring the point, but I just
don't understand why we would not accept that type
of money that seems so, and especially when we're
the first institute in the entire country. It
makes no sense to me whatsoever. It's a tragedy.
And I think it's purely a personal matter, the one
individual that's standing in the way.
And I'm in hopes that I've had some talks with
Vanderveer, not about this specific problem, but
about his interest in world food problems. And
he's appointed me to the committee to participate
with the large seminar he wants to have held here in
84 on world food problem. I'm in hopes that he will
have a different attitude and can take that
barrier out of pipeline that we've got in now so
that this thing can function again because
there's tremendous need for what can be done and
people here eager to do it there are there about
four faculty members out here now that are
formerly with the program that would be eager to
work in this area they spent time overseas with us
and or know the importance of it and be glad to do
research in this area if they were simply
permitted to do it in terms of getting funding
and so on. I don't understand exactly why anyone
would stand in the way of this. No, I can't either
except that when Dr. Trevino wanted to go out and
get the money to do a project, he was told that That
wasn't his job, to go get the money that had to be
done by somebody on a higher level. So he didn't get
to go, and so the money never came.
But why didn't you have these problems? Because
President Rutter had simply said, you fellows get
on with it, and we did. Nobody stood in our way. And
we never got 10 cents from the experiment station
and never wanted it, because we wanted to be free to
do as we chose, you see. And at that time the vet
school wasn't getting hardly anything from the
experiment station either. The vet school was
free and we were free to do as we needed to do. But
once the experiment station got domineering over
the vet school and after they appointed the
current associate dean for research who took my
job, As an assistant to the director of the
experiment station, that was the end of
everything. Because he has to do what he's told by
the experiment station. It's a damn tragedy
what's happened. Has the experiment station
getting in on funding, has their funding
increased to the College of Veterinary Medicine
quite a bit? It has some, but I don't think It's
enough so that the dean doesn't want to lose it, I'm
sure. And on the other hand, has the amount of
independence of other parts of the vet school been
decreased because of the experiment station? I
really can't answer that. I don't know. I don't
know. I haven't really been concerned with this
part of it.
I suspect so, but I don't know.
And what do you think the future is for the
institute? Well, it has a tremendous potential if
the barrier in the pipeline could be wiped out or
eliminated or totally keep out of it. That's all it
would take. There's plenty of opportunities to
get money right today. In the last year, there have
been some opportunities from Latin American
countries, from Mexico, in addition to those
earlier offers we got from Nigeria and places like
that. But for some reason, none of them have been
accepted. I don't know why. It doesn't make sense.
When a program out there would increase
opportunities to export Texas livestock and
decrease the threat of exotic disease to Texas
livestock industry, it just doesn't make sense to
me prevent it happening. So I don't understand it.
But in your opinion the main problem is just on a
personal level then. That's right. I think it's
one individual who for some reason wanted to
dominate the thing to the point that he cut it off
and didn't, and for some reason
He and Trevino didn't get along because Trevino
wanted to get on with things and the other fellow
wanted to do it and didn't find time to do anything.
That's the only thing I can say.
It's a tragedy, really, when the need is so great.
How did you get along with this person? I never had
anything to do with him, fortunately. I served as
the director of the Institute for from 64 through,
I'm sorry, from 74 through 76, when he took my job as
associate dean. See, I retired from associate
deanship in 74, but I stayed on for two more years
just at the Institute. Well, fortunately, during
that period of time, we still had money coming from
aid, so there wasn't a real problem. And he didn't
have anything to do with that, because that was
already established. But once then in 77, he moved
from associate dean of research up to director of
the experiment station. And Trevino took my
place, and that's when the water was cut off.
Unfortunately, the aid program was due for
renewal at that time.
And, but it possibly would have been, plus the
additional money that could have come in from
other sources, but never were accepted. So if he
wouldn't have become director of the experiment
station, I mean, if he would have become director
of the experiment station while you were still at
the institute, you might have had problems also.
Oh, I think so, yeah. I think so. I think anybody
would have had problems. At least that's my
impression.
Well, that's a shame. You would think that the
Experiment Station would want to increase
funding. Yeah, I don't understand it. I don't
understand it at all.
But you think that Vandiver might be moving? I hope
so. I certainly do. There was a meeting of the
Animal Health Commission in which Trevino was
present and Experiment Station Director was
present. Gil got up and sold them on the need for
acceptance of some foreign funds to get on with the
program. And the other man got up right afterward
and said that the Experiment Station wouldn't
have anything to do with it. What
was the reasoning? I don't know. I don't know. It
just doesn't make sense. I think it was a personal
matter primarily. I just thank the Lord I wasn't
directly involved at that time, but it still burns
me up to think that anybody would do that to a
program that we had going so well for a 12-year
period and then cut the water off just for personal
reasons.
Well, let's talk about One last thing I guess that
maybe you have something else that we should talk
about, but I'd like you to talk about the
development of A&M from the time you were there,
how it improved, and I'd like you to compare A&M,
that college, to others in the country.
Well, when I came here in 64, The vet school had a
three-year program. They had condensed the
four-year program into three years by avoiding
summer vacations. In order to be able to handle the
large number of students that were interested in
veterinary medicine, they typically had about
seven applications for each space in the vet
school at that time. And there were around 35, 38
students in the vet college per class all during
those years with great pressure on them. And so
this, I believe, during that time period was the
largest veterinary school in terms of class
attendance of any in the United States. And so
there was great pressure on the staff and on the
facilities here. And so during the late 60s, there
was sizable expansion in terms of physical plant
at the College of Veterinary Medicine. And then in
the 70s, of course, there in the late 70s, there has
been additional expansion there with the new
clinical buildings that have just been completed
in the last couple of years. So during this whole
period from 64 to date, there has been a steady
improvement with good support from university
funding, from the board to increase facilities to
better accommodate the students. And then about,
I'm not sure of the date, but around 1975, there was
a biological science component offered. At the
time when Dean Price retired and took over
biological science and Dean Shelton came in, that
segment has grown substantially with I don't know
how many students they have. But I know in the first
couple of years, there were 700 or 800 of them
altogether.
That doesn't mean any one class, of course, but
collectively. So the pressure for increasing
facilities out there to train biological science
students, many of whom hope to get into veterinary
medicine after two or three years of preliminary
sort of pre-veterinary training, that has
greatly increased the activity and demands on
faculty and increased the size of staff as well as
facilities out there. And to the best of my
knowledge, TechCNM has one of the best vet schools
in the United States. And it still continues to be,
I think, the largest one. Now the pressure for
student
vacancies, student entrances, decreased some in
the last four or five years because there have been
four or five new schools of veterinary medicine in
the United States. New school in Florida, a new
school in Tennessee.
Virginia Tech. Virginia Tech, that's right. So at
least three new schools. That's reduced some of
the pressure. So now I think there's only probably
two or three applicants per vacancy each fall out
there. But it's still, as far as I'm concerned,
doing very well. doing a good job. Now, you went to
Cornell, huh? And Cornell, of course, is always
usually mentioned as one of the greatest. Yes. How
would you compare those two institutions? Well,
I think they're both very good in quality. Cornell
never had as large a student body, excepted as
large a student body as they have here. Cornell is
more endowed, less state supported institution
in total than Texas A&M. There were just about 40
students per class, as I recall, when I was there.
But I think they turn out equally competent
veterinarians, I believe. Now let's compare
this. You've had a lot of international
experience. And I've never asked anybody about
the quality of the vet schools in other countries.
How would you compare us with other countries?
Well, it depends on the country, but one of the
greatest handicaps for vet schools, for example,
in India and Pakistan and some of those related
countries, is the fact that the hangover of the
caste system is so great that A veterinarian in
India and Pakistan will have an assistant that
hopefully will do all his physical labor part, and
he'll stand and tell him what to do. And from my
point of view, that isn't nearly as effective nor
as efficient as if the veterinarian does it
himself. I've seen Indian veterinarians. stand
and tell a technician where to cut and what to do
doing an autopsy and things of that sort rather
than do it themselves. Too often I have seen Indian
fellows who got PhDs in this country in
laboratories back in India that would sit dressed
up at the desk in the front office when the
technicians back in the lab didn't know what in the
hell they were doing. and they wouldn't take the
time or effort to go back and even help them very
much. So I think that's one of the greatest
handicaps to medicine in general and certainly to
veterinary medicine in those countries that
still have this sort of hangover of a caste system.
What about Latin America and South America? Well,
I think it's better there,
for the most part, the veterinarians
in my experience, at least in Latin America, have
not had the detail of technical training in the
sciences that relate to veterinary medicine that
we have had in this country. For example, they
don't have, to my knowledge, any colleges of
American Veterinary College, like the American
College of Veterinary Pathologists, that have to
get five years of specialized training beyond
their veterinary degree before they become a
pathologist, you see. And we in this country go
through that sort of additional specialized
training with usually a PhD involved in order to
become a board member in pathology to study the
slides and do the pathology with similar
specialties in the various fields. In the United
States, most of our faculty are people who have
this specialized training in their departments.
While in Latin America, there's a relative
minimum of people that have got specialized
training, unless they've gotten it abroad. Now,
some have gone abroad and come to the States and to
England and so on and got specialized training.
But they're a minimal fraction of their faculty as
compared to the United States. And I think that's
true. And certainly it's true in Africa and in
Asian countries. What about Europe? In Europe,
the quality there is more comparable to that in the
United States with specialized training. And how
about Canada? Yes, I think Canada is very
comparable to the United States also. I worked for
several years in Canada at this war disease
control station on an island out in the St.
Lawrence River. Oh really? During the early part
of the war. And worked with Canadian
veterinarians and I thought they were very
comparable with those in the States.
You might be a little interested in that. We worked
up there on rinderpest primarily because it was
considered a major...